next on American history TV author
Donald Thomas analyzes the acoustic
evidence in the Kennedy assassination
and attempts to trace the timeline of
events from that day in November 1963 he
also discusses acoustic findings by the
1970s House Select Committee on
assassinations Thomas's 40-minute
presentation is entitled JFK acoustical
evidence challenge and corroboration he
spoke at a conference marking the 50th
anniversary of the release of the Warren
Report hosted by the assassination
archives and Research Center in 1978 the
House Select Committee on assassinations
heard testimony from acoustical experts
that the gun fire that killed President
Kennedy had been recorded on Dallas
police radio and that it included a
gunshot from the grass you know well
that evidence has been under challenge
ever since it came out most recently in
a in a book by a political scientist
here in Virginia Larry Sabato wrote a
book called the Kennedy legacy and it
included a chapter on the assassination
for which he commissioned a study of the
acoustical evidence by a firm called
sonna list and the sonna list issued
report which said that the acoustical
evidence was invalid some of you might
have been president in Pittsburgh when I
spoke and I just had to say that I
hadn't actually read the study just came
out so I couldn't fairly comment on it
so today I am going to a chance to read
it and so I will make some comments
about it for starters know we're in the
sauna list report is there a discussion
let alone analysis let alone criticism
of the core acoustical evidence bike or
acoustical evidence I mean there are
sounds on the Dallas police tape which
the acoustical experts identify as the
gunfire that killed President Kennedy
well since they didn't analyze those
sound
then how could they how did they show
that the acoustical evidence is invalid
well of course they didn't so why did
they say that the acoustical evidence is
invalid that's what I want to talk about
on the day President Kennedy was
assassinated the Dallas police were
broadcasting over two channels one they
called which I designated as channel 1
was the primary channel for routine 24/7
broadcast it was being recorded on a on
addicted belt lager oops
like this one here and they also had an
auxiliary channel which they designated
channel 2 which was used for special
events in this case it was for
communications among the president's
security detail it was being recorded on
a gray autograph machine like the one
shown here so the president's security
detail was divided into two components
he was scheduled to give a luncheon
speech out at the Dallas Trade Mart the
Market Hall for which 400 police
officers have been detailed to provide
security guard detail the motorcade had
18 motorcycles along with a pilot car
driven by the I'm sorry
driven by Secret Service but have the
Chief of Police giving directions on how
to get to the Trade Mart so these two
groups were in radio communication over
channel 2 so I'll start by I'm going to
go ahead and play the crucial part from
channel 2 which has live broadcast
coming from Dealey Plaza at the time of
the assassination
[Applause]
okay so obviously the key broadcast
coming from chief curry the first one to
overtly indicate the assassination has
happened is the one the orders to go to
the hospital the other broadcast which
came from Dealey Plaza from chief curry
was when he announced that he was at the
triple underpass
so he's in Dealey Plaza in between the
two you see the dispatcher said it was
12:30 right this is a picture from the
motorcade
shortly after seconds after the shooting
in fact there's the limousine in front
of the picture there's the underpass is
the bridge here back here and that's the
lead car the pilot car that's where
those broadcasts were coming from from
chief curry now seconds later chief
curry when he got underneath the
underpass he stopped and the limousine
pulled up alongside him and that's when
he knew the president had been shot and
that's when he made the broadcast to go
to the hospital to put that into a
perspective this is the this is Elm
Street this is the triple underpass
that's the grassy knoll there's the Book
Depository so this is the kill zone the
president's limousine was in this area
when he was shot this so the lead car
was about 150 feet in front of him so
that broadcast when he says I'm at the
triple underpass that's the broadcast I
actually closes to the time of the
shooting so that's our marker for the
time of the assassination on that
channel meantime over on channel 1 very
unusual but as it turns out fortuitous
event happened for five and a half
minutes the channel is dominated by the
sound of a motorcycle motor and that
occasion the following broadcast
[Applause]
okay that was at 12:33 and the question
is what made the dispatcher disaster
nations at 12:30 this is three minutes
later and so the question is what made
that dispatcher so certain that the
motorcycle was on Stemmons freeway the
clues in this one minute earlier on
channel 1
[Music]
okay mm-hmm you could hear sirens the
one the dispatcher knew that the one
emergency happening at the time was the
president had been shot the limousine
was on its way to Parkland Hospital with
his police escort sirens blaring so he
simply made the deduction that the
motorcycle must be with the motorcade
well if that's one cycle is with the
motorcade and no one of the 18 with the
motorcade there was a chance then that
it was in Dealey Plaza and had its
microphone open and if so we would have
captured the sounds of the gunfire and
have direct evidence relevant to one of
the great controversies of the
assassination that being the number of
shots was there the three that the
Warren Commission insisted on or was the
more than three is that all the evidence
seems to indicate so the House Select
Committee arranged for an acoustical
expert firm to analyze the recording
they chose on the recommendation of the
acoustical Society of America firm
called BBN most famous for doing the
Watergate tapes but more importantly
they had done the Kent State shooting
tapes which was the first forensic use
of acoustics to identify the origin of a
gunshot and more recently they developed
the boomerang the anti sniper device
which is on our military vehicles which
in real time tells from the gunshot
exactly where the sniper is on display a
screen the GPS so they were asked to
apply this technology to the police
tapes the first thing they did was
analyzed the dicta belt looking for
sounds that could be gunfire and they
found five so they went to Dealey Plaza
they fired test shots from the Book
Depository and from the grassy knoll and
compared those test shots and found that
all five of them matched the suspect
sounds matched to test shots fired in
Dealey Plaza so including one that
matched to the grassy knoll so that was
one welcome news for in some quarters
and so the House Select Committee
decided they needed to get in a second
opinion
so they went to another laboratory these
fellows Weisen ashkenazi were experts on
signal analysis especially sonar so they
had them review the study that was done
by BBN and not only did they concur with
the analysis and the methods in their
conclusions they actually applied then
their sonar analysis to the alleged
grassy knoll shot to show to a
scientific certainty that there was a
gunshot from the grassy knoll on the
Dallas police tape as I said it's been
an under challenge ever since the first
challenge came from the Justice
Department the House Select Committee
said now that we have evidence for
conspiracy the Justice Department's
reopened the case and they rather than
do that they asked for yet another
review of the acoustical evidence so
they arranged for this fellow luis
alvarez and others to do a study of the
acoustical evidence for over a year they
tried to find flaws in the analysis the
core acoustical evidence were unable to
but then they found thanks to a phone
call from rock musician who would listen
to the call that there was a cross talk
simulcast between the channels okay and
what that means is remember channel 1 is
the one that has the sounds that have
been identified as gunfire channel 2 is
the broadcast is coming from Dealey
Plaza where we can pinpoint the time the
assassination so if these sounds are in
fact the gunshots that killed Kennedy
they had to have been deposited on the
recording at the very instant Kennedy
was being shot if there's some way to
synchronize the events between the two
channels then you can see if they are
synchronous well there was a simulcast
and ironically it's this one and you
will go ahead and play for us hello
[Applause]
[Music]
okay so the irony is that a broadcast
from the lead car from sheriff Decker
ordering his deputies to surround the
grassy knoll and hold everything secure
is supposed to be evidence that there
was no gun shot from the grassy knoll
well the part that simulcast over that
was crossed over from channel 1 to
channel 2 with these three little words
hold everything secure now this
broadcast comes about 80 seconds after
the broadcast that says I'm at the
triple underpass so and on the channel
one recording I'm sorry yeah on the
channel one recording the sounds are
almost exactly simultaneous with those
words hold everything secure so here's
the scenario
there's my thing working here I guess
I've run out of a laser but you can see
where the shooting is on channel 2 and
you can see where the shots are on
channel 1 and when you align the
simulcast together it shows that they
are completely separate they're
disconnected and therefore this was
evidence to show that the acoustical
evidence is therefore invalid so this is
their scenario and this is the actual
truth this is the reality is that there
was not one who there are actually five
simulcasts on the recording and if you
use any one as your anchor point or tie
point none of the others synchronize
with themselves and so the reason is
because these are not continuous
full-time recordings the time line is
broken and they had simply chosen the
simulcast that was the most disconnected
to shy to show that the acoustical
evidence was invalid if you'll notice
however that there is one broadcast
which is the closest one to the actual
time of the shooting
my releasers coming back there okay the
Fisher a broadcast by deputy chief
Fisher if you see where it aligns to the
shooting where it aligns to the shots
and this is and this of course has a
special significance because it because
it is the closest one to the actual time
of the assassination it's the one that's
most reliable because it's the least
likely to be disrupted by whatever's
causing the breaks in the timelines okay
also there's a difference between false
negatives and false positives if you
have a break in the timeline that
automatically creates a false positive
it will automatically make things that
are really synchronous appear to be non
synchronous but a break in the timeline
cannot make something appear synchronous
that requires a diabolical coincidence
that's the difference between a false
negative and false positive so in this
case you to say that's a false positive
requires a diabolical coincidence okay
so I'm going to play this for you now
this is the to remind you this is that
crosstalk okay so this is deputy chief
Fisher who says the words knots alright
I'll check it and those three little
words that fragment of speech was
simulcast over onto channel one and
you'll notice it's just two seconds
before he says triple underpass which is
our marker for the time the
assassination now we go over and I'll
play for you the hold on don't not yet
all right I want to explain is what
you're going to hear is you can hear
those two simulcasts you're gonna hear
him say I'll check it and then seven
seconds later 11 seconds later you'll
hear him say hold everything secure in
between those two are the sounds that
the acoustical experts identified as
gunshots now you're not going to hear to
blam buddy blam blam because this is not
a high-fidelity recording if you could
hear the gunshots
it was a high-fidelity recording you
wouldn't need acoustical experts to come
tell you these are gunshots this is a
it's called the voice grade recording
the radio was voice grade which means
that it amplified sounds and the
frequency of a human voice that was then
to enhance radio communications it does
not it doesn't mean that the gunshots
won't be there they're just not
amplified so they're buried in the
background that's why you need the
acoustical experts to go out and do
their study all right so I'm going to
play for you now you can hear the two
simulcast
[Applause]
okay I'll play it for you again so now
you know what you're listening for you
[Applause]
okay all right so far
yeah far from being proof that the
acoustical heavens was invalided
actually that when you look at all the
cross talks you find it does corroborate
the timing of the gunshot sounds as
being simultaneous with the
assassination
now here comes Larry Sabato and his
study by Sanne lists this is what he
says he says our research demonstrates
the police officer with the open
microphone was traveling at a high rate
of speed at the time the slow-moving
presidential motorcade progressed
through the streets of downtown Dallas
and I had the WTF moment when I read
this because okay we all know that the
motorcycle the motorcade had slowed to a
crawl as it went through Dealey Plaza so
that part is right yeah the motorcade is
going really slow fact that's one of the
controversies why did the who routed
this through Dealey Plaza and all these
turns where the president was a sitting
duck so but he says that the motorcycle
at that time is moving in a high rate of
speed but that's not what we've what we
find at all okay first of all to put
this into perspective when the goose
tickle experts analyze this data what
they found was that the very first sound
on the police recording matched to a
test shot that was recorded on a
microphone here which is on Houston
Street the second sound matched to a
test shot that was recorded on a
microphone here little closer to the
intersection the third at this position
in the fourth year and the fifth here it
was this order in the data not just the
matching of the sounds to on between the
test shots and the radio sounds that
convinced them that these were the
gunshots
this was the gunfire because of the way
they were ordered they were in one two
three four five order if this were
random noises if there were anything
else other than had nothing to do with
the topology of Dealey Plaza
they would be in random scattered order
there wouldn't be any particular order
but they're in one two three four or
five there's only this one chance in 125
you can get those five to line up like
that but it's not just the sequence it's
the spacing because on the police tape
the first three sounds are about a
second apart they're spaced at about a
second and then there's a five second
space and then there's two sounds close
together so the spacing also matches the
spacing on the recording and furthermore
the trajectory matches because the
distance between this microphone and
this microphone is 130 feet and the
spacing on the radio is 8.3 seconds now
to go 130 feet in 8.3 seconds that's the
speed of about 11 miles per hour and the
Dow's the FBI studying the Zapruder film
showed that the average speed of the
motorcade was eleven point three miles
per hour
so you've got a precise match that order
in the data that convinced the
acoustical experts that this was the
assassination gunfire and for us what it
means is that the motorcycle had to have
been here at the intersection at the
time of those first three shots he had
to be right in here so when we go back
and we look in the superior film and the
other films the newsreels what we find
is that of the 18 motorcycles it's easy
to show that 17 of them were definitely
in the wrong place but one guy this is
Hollis MacLean HB MacLean we see him
just before the fire before the
assassination he was just turning on to
Huston Street and this picture taken
about 30 seconds after the shooting
that's him on Elm Street so at a
reasonable rate of speed he could have
been at that intercept she's the one guy
that could have been in the right place
at the right time and then so this
models out the sequence of where he
would have been so he's he's driving
slowly I'm sorry he's driving in a
relatively steady rate and on Houston
Street if I'm pointing the right place
he slows to about 11 miles an hour
through the intersection and then he
idles along for
about another 30 seconds and that is
consistent what we see in various
newsreels here's one that's good because
it shows all four of the motorcycles
that were in this part of the motorcade
plus hard jizz hard gist is the guy who
was right behind Kennedy he got off his
motorcycle and he ran up onto the grassy
knoll because that's where he got the
shots came from then he decided he'd
better stay with the motorcade so he ran
back to his motorcycle this was taken
about 20 seconds after the assassination
this has taken about 28 seconds after
the assassination and now this is
McClane the far side it's hard juses
motorcycle and then as a police auction
in course and who's catching up to
McClane and then when Corson caught up
with McClane they raced off you can see
they're leaning they're speeding up so
this is about 30 seconds now this is the
evidence that Sanne lists uses Sanne
lists analyzed that recording they they
analyzed the loudness of the motorcycle
motor and they said okay we're going to
correlate there's a correlation between
the loudness and the motorcycle motor
and the speed now anybody's actually had
a motorcycle know that there's ever not
a really good correlation but
nevertheless it's reasonable to say that
the motorcycle is humming along here and
then for about 40 seconds if you look at
the timeline down here from about 14
minutes to 15 minutes there's about a 40
second trough here where the motorcycle
motor has slowed down and up here are
their markers because they're if you can
see it is where he's got your two
simulcast where he says I'll check it
and where he says hold everything secure
and that corresponds right after that
sound dropped and that's what you hear
on the radio so why in the heck are they
saying that the motorcycle is going fast
at the time when the shots were happened
when the assassination happened well
it's back over here they say this is
where the assassination occurred
according to the NRC panel
on that bogus timing that they use from
that crosstalk so in reality all of
their evidence actually fits well we
know of the the films and sounds on the
recording in fact what they say this is
something new they said that there's
divergent data around fourteen thirty
right in here that suggests there's
multiple motorcycles right in this time
well yeah there's three motorcycles
together right at that moment so all of
their sounds all of their Cesana list
analysis perfectly fits the acoustical
evans the only thing that doesn't fit
was that old NRC panel claimed that that
wasn't not synchronous with the time
assassination
so the Silas report does not assess the
core acoustical evidence dishonest data
is actually consistent with and
corroborates the acoustical evidence and
thus honest report depended on that
discredited timeline analysis to
challenge the evidence
and I'll take any questions
good it was all perfectly played Paul
you're always ready aren't you yes I
know dr. Thomas I am reading your book
hear no evil the best evidence seems to
suggest it President Kennedy was hit by
four separate bullets two from the front
and two from behind and that Governor
Connally may have been hit by one or two
additional bullets and then of course we
know there was a ball that flew over the
motorcade and hit the cement and a
cement fragment flew up and hit by
standard Jane t-take in the cheek and
then there's another photograph of a
police officer picking up a bullet from
the grass now on robben Grogan's DVD a
case for the conspiracy you can hear
five separate shots a single that there
are six or more shots how you count the
fact that you can't hear them well I
guess I wouldn't assume that there were
six right okay I'm gonna go with the
five shots okay okay now I have heard
people ask me that question all the time
actually and basically the question
being what if somebody was shooting with
a silencer yes okay and well yeah if
there's somebody shooting with a
silencer then I'm not gonna pick it up
on your police radio so it would be a
silencer okay that if you can't hear
that shot that would be in a scenario
I'm not right personally I don't I don't
see why they're blasting away from three
different places why somebody with a
silencer would be involved but strictly
on the acoustical evidence yeah you
can't you would have to be a silence
doctor Mantic always good to hear you
don tell me did you do your analysis
based on the Bowles tape or have you
used the FBI copy also yeah I'm glad you
asked that because
really the the real acoustical evidence
the heavy lifting was done by these guys
at bolt Beranek and Newman I'm sort of
in the position of defending I claim I
understand the evidence and actually as
far as it's anything acoustical really
it was where I I calculated the caliber
of the of the gun from from the
shockwave on there but yeah we were
we're using the actual the FBI and I
played for you here was the FBI
recording go ahead so your original
paper used bowls but now you're using
FBI I'm still not quite sure no as far
as okay again I didn't do the analysis
when when Barger when BBN did their
analysis they did they use the Bulls
tape right right
the FBI tape was recorded and was made
in 82 right okay my doctor Thomas
I'm Brian Rooney could you just explain
briefly the significance significance of
that bell ringing that your that's it
was on your presentation I don't think
you mention it right I know that's a
controversial thing for some people okay
yeah and I think the the Bell probably
does have a lot of good clues as to how
it how it got on there it turns out the
original one of the original criticisms
was that there was no Bell that was
picked up audibly and there was no Bell
in Dealey Plaza and then they later
turned out that was Gary Mac that went
back and found recordings because it was
one year later that one of the news
teams had gone to Dealey Plaza for the
first anniversary and had recorded
ceremony there in Dealey Plaza
and lo and behold right at 12:30 you
could hear a bell so there was a bell
in Dealey Plaza but that doesn't
necessarily mean that's where that Bell
came from because later it was
discovered that there's a slight offset
in town in in the two recordings so that
suggests that this it might have gone on
there
from the same way the cross talks got on
there the way that cross talks those
voices that you hear how the simulcast
happened it turns out that at the
trademart there were police officers who
were King and they were together and
they were keying their radios and some
were on channel one and some were on
channel two and so someone on channel
one was opening their microphone
clicking because you can hear a lot of
little beeps and they were trying to
signal that guy with the stuck
microphone and maybe that turned off his
microphone his radio they were picking
up those little fragments of speech
that's how that happened so now the
suspicion is because of that slight
little offset between in time between
the weather two bells are on both
channels is that it could have been a
bell because of those two differences
between channel one and channel two
microphones may have been about 40 feet
apart and that would explain that slight
little difference in time between where
that Bell was so it might have been a
bell not the one in Dealey Plaza that
might been a bell that was audible from
over where the trademart is I still
think that that if someone would really
really analyze that bell sound and tried
to do a study on it there could be some
real clues especially with regard to why
there are these offsets in time why the
timeline is broken I think thank you I'd
like to just make amplify something from
from your book by the way and and also
something for the audience to know and
that is when the HSC came up with this
rather shocking discovery that there
appeared to be shots that proved a
grassy knoll shot and more than four
shot or more than three shots they did
they did say you know we ought to have a
look at this again and they made some
recommendations as to how it ought to be
done and they suggested that when
someone else looks at this again they
should get acoustics experts so who did
they end up getting they got the Ramzi
panel the ramsey panel consisted of no
acoustics experts on the ramsey panel
they're all physicists and friends and
and colleagues or junior partners of
Louie Alvarez the other thing to add
about Alvarez is that as we know Alvarez
with hell you know falsified his own
shooting experiments we found that out
and Paul hoax of files may some of you
in this room probably also know that
Louie Alvarez is the guy that denied
that there had been a nuclear test in
the South Indian Ocean the so-called
Vela incident Vella Vella satellite
picked up a nuclear flash in the South
Indian Ocean and it was then thought
that there had been a nuclear blast on
the basis of this flash that was very
embarrassing for the Carter
Administration and so they they wanted
to to refute the idea that Israel in
South Africa had had done a nuclear test
down there so they brought out Louie
Alvarez now Louie Alvarez sure enough
went through a very elaborate study and
and said no well under normal
circumstances are given a false positive
before a flash that wasn't a nuclear
test but in this particular case there
was some unusual event that it was not a
nuclear blast and then Seymour Hersh of
course went down and you talked to the
people down there and the Israelis that
were involved and said yeah you know
that was a mistake on our part we would
always do those nuclear tests under
cloud cover so the satellites wouldn't
pick it up at that day damn it the
clouds parted and we didn't get the word
out just to hold off the nuclear test so
there had been a nuclear test so Alvarez
as as tink Thompson was causing it's
some kind of a patriot when you need
when you need something you know and you
need something done you call in Louise
Alvarez to do that and and you know he
carries the the you know the water for
you and he did that I think in the in
the acoustics as well as he did with the
shooting experiments as well as he did
with a Vela incident Alan thank you um
dr. Thomas am i correcting in thinking
that you believe that the evidence shows
that there were five shots one from
behind the grassy knoll fence one the
source of which is undefined and three
from behind but not exactly defined
where from behind yes correct the of the
BBN idea
five five gunshots one of those only one
of those was analyzed using the sonar
analysis to actually pinpoint the origin
and that was the study that the second
group twice and ashkenazi did to show
that there was a gunshot from the grassy
knoll now the way that the BBN did their
analysis they were focusing on the echo
field that was being produced and they
found their best match of their five one
of them matched to the test shot that
came from the grass you know that's the
one that Weiss and ashkenazi focused on
with their sonar analysis and showed to
a much greater detail that it was a
gunshot from the grass you know the
other four were never the sonar analysis
was never applied so when we're assuming
three of those came from the Book
Depository in the three they did match
two Tesh offs from the Book Depository
and that left that fit that rogues shop
which was never been analyzed in spite
of people trying yes has acoustical
experts analyzed these other shots but
that's never been done
so they only defined the actual source
of the acoustically defined shot is from
behind the fence on the grassy knoll and
that's correct
Thank You dr. Newman yes I did maybe Don
you can answer this question about while
we're talking about bullets and holes
and all that stuff I happened to be with
Steve Tilly and narrow one day and we
were looking at a galley proof of the
warm report and in one section I don't
know what the page was the handwritten
note was move bullet hole up nine inches
now I was told that the handwriting was
Gerald Ford's and I'm not an expert on
that but I just wondered where we stand
today on that maybe if Cyril's not here
Gary could talk to that or maybe Don
somebody who knows a little more than I
do about that but I saw it with my eyes
I was astounded thank you right and
later it was it was realized that Ford
had done that that he moved it up
because the the photographs actually do
show the that the gun entrance wound was
in the was in the back and he wanted to
be in the neck to give it a better
trajectory
now the last question now is your fork
yep sure yeah well no now and he's been
exposed to that you can google it up and
in it became it was a minor news item
for a while that general forwarded
basically to him wanted to move the that
the back wound up a little bit and had
done so dr. Thomas this is more of a
comment and I'm a novice among all these
experts but about three years ago we
were at the Adolphus in Dallas and we
were walking up to the dinner which
we're having tonight and a similar thing
and an old gentleman was walking up with
me and it turns out that it was officer
McLane an officer I thought this might
interest somebody in here so I was
sitting next to him and talking with him
through the dinner and his whole family
was sitting around the table and of
course me be naive and an amateur at
this I was just asking him innocent
questions and he said he hadn't spoken
for fifty years or whatever it was
because so many people around him that
did speak or let's say everybody his
family made him promise not to speak
after the government I don't know who
the government is went to the Dallas
Police Department and said what did you
see and he told the truth along with the
other officers they said no you didn't
see that and he said I won't say what he
said but in expletive and he never spoke
again about the topic and I don't know
if he's still living or not but 50 years
later he started talking and I sat next
to him and he talked the whole night it
was incredible it made me really sad
because I remember as a young I was like
11 seeing him next to mrs. Kennedy's
next to the car and he said he's the one
that told mrs. Kennedy mrs. Kennedy you
have to let your husband go now I have
to I mean you know that's a moment you
never forget right Thank You mr. garden
we've really got to move forward
is it possible could we address this
with with dr.
in private I just want to make a
statement okay I was the one who
synchronized the acoustics tape with the
Zapruder film for the house
assassinations committee and it was a
unanimous feeling of all of us who were
working on it that the fatal shot came
from the front professor Blakey didn't
want that he wanted the fatal shot to be
from behind and changed what we had done
but we were unanimous that this shot had
come from the FRA that's all